
H1 Reflection
Have you ever found yourself using ‘accommodation’ when your teenager was anxious:
Because you felt anxious yourself?
Yes
No
Parents may identify (too) strongly with their teenager’s anxiety and distress, and become powerfully motivated to ‘rescue’ their teenager. Parents may want to provide their teenager with reassurance or a sense of security that they wished they had received. Or they may simply not know other ways to respond to anxiety! The rest of this module presents some useful strategies.
To prevent significant disruption to your teenager’s life, or the entire family (e.g. getting everyone ready for school and work)?
When it feels like you have to choose between accommodation and a significant disruption to loved ones’ (and your own) lives, accommodation may seem like the obvious choice! If the situation is a recurring one, it would be helpful to plan ahead how you can respond differently.
To protect your teenager’s social status (i.e. so that they don’t get judged negatively by others)?
Social status is really important for teenagers so it’s understandable that parents would want to help protect their teenagers from getting a hard time from others. A more helpful and lasting solution is to help your teenager develop their own social and anxiety-management skills – see the rest of this module and theGood friends = supportive relationshipsmodule for some tips.
Because you believe that anxiety is harmful and should be avoided?
It is no surprise that parents who hold this belief would accommodate their teenager’s anxiety. But remember, anxiety at low levels is normal and can be useful. The key is to manage it well, rather than avoid it – more on this later in this module.
Because your teenager reacted strongly against you not being accommodating (e.g. becoming physically or verbally aggressive, including accusations that you don’t care or understand how they feel)?
When parents do not accommodate their teenager’s anxiety, there is usually a short-term increase in their teenager’s distress. If your teenager has become dependent on you to accommodate their anxiety, they may find it too overwhelming to face anxieties without your ‘rescue’, and react strongly against you withdrawing your accommodation. The strategies we discuss in this module can help to not just replace accommodating behaviours, but also build your teenager’s ability to manage their own anxiety better.
If you said ‘Yes’ to any of the above, take heart – you’re not alone! These
are the most common reasons why parents find themselves responding to their
teenagers’ anxiety with accommodation.