
H1 Ways to help your teenager manage anxiety
Fighting fear by facing fear

H6 Gently encourage your teenager to face their fears.
Why?
Help your teenager understand that the best way to overcome their anxiety is to face the situation that makes them anxious. Avoiding anxiety-provoking situations does not take the anxiety away in the long-term. In fact, it can increase the anxiety.

H6 The process of facing fears is called ‘exposure’.
How does it work?
Facing fears is about helping your teenager to ‘expose’ themselves to situations that make them anxious. It is important to start 'exposure' slowly. With your teenager, make a list of situations that make them feel nervous or scared. Next, arrange the list from the least scary to the most. Start with one of the least scary situations and encourage your teenager to stay in the situation until their anxiety reduces. Repeat several times until the anxiety is almost gone and your teenager is feeling more confident about the situation. Then, move on to the next thing on the list.

H6 Encourage your teenager to face their fears, but don’t push them.
How?
Facing fears is scary. Pushing your teenager to face situations they don't feel ready for can make them more anxious. Instead, acknowledge how hard it is to face fears and encourage them to believe that they can face their fears one step at a time, and that they have your full support. Be confident that your teenager is capable of handling a situation before encouraging them to face it. For example, it may not be helpful to encourage your teenager to enter a singing contest if they are not yet comfortable singing in front of the family.
If your teenager is currently seeing a health professional to manage their clinical anxiety, check with your teenager to see how you can support what they are working on with their health professional (professionals commonly use ‘exposure’ when treating individuals with clinical anxiety).
[IMAGE: 54-01-AUS-version.svg - Mother and daughter sitting on bench chatting]