
H2 Finding the right information
With so much constantly-changing information about the pandemic out there, it’s important to seek information from reliable and credible sources. Discuss with your teen where they are getting news and information from, and how trustworthy these sources are.How can you tell whether information is reliable and trustworthy? Click the numbers below to see some things to consider.
Here’s an anatomy of a reliable news source.
[IMAGE: 9-reliable-news.png - Reliable News]
1
Where is it published?
Check the website details to see if the site is published by a reputable organisation. Domains that include .gov (government) or .edu (educational/academic) typically provide reliable information.
2
Who is the author?
Credible sources will publish the author details. Is the author qualified to provide this information? Do they indicate their sources? You might even want to do your own online search to find out more about the author.
3
Does it present fact or opinion?
Look for sources that present verifiable facts, rather than someone’s opinion. Factual information should provide sources/references, and should be verifiable by searching yourself.
4
Do other credible sources agree?
Consider doing your own search of the topic and compare information with trusted sources such as government websites and the World Health Organisation. Domains that include .gov (government) or .edu (educational/academic) typically provide reliable information.
5
When was it published?
A reliable source will include a publication date. Is it recent? Is the website updated regularly.
You can find a list of credible sources about COVID-19 on ourUseful Resourcespage.
Does your teen have a learning difficulty, chronic health condition, or disability? Here are some extra tips:
- Filter the information you give your teen based on what you think is appropriate for them, including language they will understand, and how the pandemic may affect them and their health condition.
- Consider asking your teen’s health professional to help you develop ways to speak with your teen about the pandemic.