
H2 Supporting online learning
How does your teen cope with online learning?
Spend a moment reflecting on your teen, what they like or dislike about online learning, and what supports they might need while learning from home.
Now consider this scenario. Amy’s school has moved to online learning during the latest lockdown. She is trying to study for Year 8 science, taking notes while watching a pre-recorded online class.
Click the numbers below the image to see different ways you can support your teen during online learning.
[IMAGE: 10-teen-online-learning.png - Teen Online Learning]
1
Adjust your expectations
Keep in mind that your teen might experience anxiety about moving to online learning, even if they’ve done it before, and fatigue due to increased screen time. Because of this,adjust your expectations. Don’t expect them to engage in the same amount of work as they usually would at school.
2
Supportive space for learning
As much as you can, try to make your home asupportive space for learning, e.g. providing a quiet, distraction-free place to work and the required technology.
3
Individual learning needs
Consider your teen’sindividual learning needs. Adjust how much support and structure you provide them based on their needs.
4
Information from the school
Ask your teen whether they are getting anyinformation from the schoolthat would be helpful for you to know.
5
Create a routine
Work with your teen toplan their ideal routineto get their schoolwork done while keeping themselves physically and mentally fit.
6
Rewards
Help your teenreward themselvesafter doing a session of homework. You can alsoreward your teenafter getting through tough days by doing something fun together (e.g. eating a favourite meal or watching their favourite movie together).
7
If your teen has a learning disability
If you teen has a learning disability, ask their teachers to help you decide which key skills to focus on and how you can support your teen’s learning.
Unsure? Reach out to your teen’s teachers or school for support:
- Ask how involved you should be in your teen’s schoolwork and/or what work should take priority.
- Ask about the school’s available supports or resources (e.g. academic support, electronic devices, mental health support).
- Ask how you can support your teen’s learning process.
- If you’re concerned about how your teen is coping or keeping up at school, reach out to their teachers or other school staff.
- Keep in touch with your teen’s teachers. Include your teen in any discussions about their needs.
- If your teen usually receives additional services (e.g., mental health support, academic support), ask how these will be handled during periods of online learning.