
H1 Communication styles
These tables shows three different communication styles.
[IMAGE: 26-03-MCB.svg - Passive Expression]
Passive
Looks down and avoids eye contact
Talks with hesitation
Uses a ‘singsong’ or whining tone in a quiet voice
Uses justifications, e.g. “I wouldn’t normally say anything” and fill-in words, e.g. “Maybe”, “Er”, “Sort of”
Apologises frequently, e.g. “I’m terribly sorry to bother you...”
Uses qualifiers, e.g. “It’s only my opinion”; or “I might be wrong”
Dismisses own opinion, e.g. “It’s not important”; or “It doesn’t really matter”
Puts themself down, e.g. “I’m useless...hopeless”; or “You know me...”
Leaves the person feeling uncertain and frustrated.
[IMAGE: 26-02-MCB.svg - Assertive Expression]
Assertive
Makes direct eye contact without staring
Speaks in a steady, even pace with few hesitations
Uses “I” statements (“I like”, “I want”, “I don’t like”) that are brief and to the point
Uses a warm tone that is not overly loud or quiet
Uses co-operative phrases, e.g. “What are your thoughts on this?”
Expresses a willingness to explore other solutions, e.g. “How can we get around this problem?”
Uses distinction between fact and opinion, e.g. “My experience is different”
Gives constructive criticism without blame, e.g. “I feel frustrated when you take so long to get ready for school”
Leaves the person feeling respected and understood.
[IMAGE: 26-01-MCB.svg - Aggressive Expression]
Aggressive
Stares down and intimidates
Speaks in a fast, abrupt and clipped manner
Uses a sarcastic, cold and harsh tone that is forceful and loud.
Uses ‘You’ statements and threats, e.g. “You’d better watch out”; or “If you don’t…”
Uses put downs, e.g. “You’ve got to be kidding…”; or “Don’t be so stupid”
Tells people what to do, e.g. “This is how it’s going to be from now on”
Expresses opinions as facts, e.g. “Nobody wants to behave like that”; or “That’s a useless way to do it”
Uses sarcasm, e.g. “You must be joking”; or “I don’t suppose you managed to do that?”
Leaves the person feeling resentful and bullied.
Which column best describes how you communicate with others? Try using as many assertive skills as possible in everyday situations!